# OptNow

This is the github repository of OptNow; know your health risk better platform, which we developed during the Optum Stratethon Season 4 event as our submission. 

The problem statement for the event was concerning designing a product that can help identify subsets of geographic regions, ethnical groups, or other inhabitants that confront different health discrepancies and keep them out of the red zone. 

The project is completed with the collaboration of the following three members:
• Saad Baig
• Manish Sharma
• Sameer Alam

Product:
OptNow enables better interaction between healthcare providers, doctors, and patients making access to organized medical collaboration easy and seamless.

Our product primarily aims at identifying high-risk patients using population identification and stratification. We accomplish this task by learning patterns through the datasets generated by Synthea, a synthetic patient generator that models the medical history of artificial patients. It covers various aspects by providing datasets corresponding to a patient's background, allergies, clinics, care plans, procedures carried out for the treatment, and many more. 

Predictive analysis using machine learning on digital records helps recognize subsets of geographic regions, racial groups, or other populations that confront different health discrepancies and analyze the socio-cultural impacts.

Users can assess their risk of diagnosis by updating entries corresponding to their glucose sugar level, heartbeat, and many more. Not confined to that, we allow users to describe their conditions, allergies, and reactions in the form of text. Following any update in the database corresponding to a user, the app triggers the model to evaluate risk by classifying it to one of the five major classes in which a patient usually stays: emergency, ambulatory, inpatient, outpatient, and wellness. Our model considers various features for prediction ranging from age, gender, ethnicity, and location, but is not limited to these only.

Based on the prediction, we suggest users in taking suitable measures if required. For example, if the predicted encounter class is inpatient, a medical condition in which a patient must stay at the hospital for treatment, we tend to provide them with details corresponding to the nearest clinics. Similarly, if the predicted encounter class is outpatient, which is a condition that strongly recommends visiting a clinic. Timely and effective outpatient care can help to reduce the risks of hospitalization by either preventing the onset of an illness or condition, controlling an acute episodic illness or condition, or managing a chronic disease.

Online consultation for healthcare has increased by 500 percent over the last year, according to a report by one of the leading online portals for healthcare. About five crore Indians accessed healthcare online with an average frequency of two online doctor consultations per month per user, per the report. 

Digital tools like telephonic or video consultations allow us to limit the number of patients who come to the clinic in person. Clinic's communication with regular patients about the possibility of online talks while informing them that the clinic is open for visits generates trust and sympathy between doctor and patient in the long run. Considering the points mentioned earlier, we decided to make the consultation process as virtual as possible. We allow doctors to generate medical reports consisting of medication, descriptions of the conditions, and procedures carried out for the treatment. 

From a patient's perspective, we aim to bring as much transparency by providing access to the number of encounters carried out by the doctor and the estimated cost of treatment. We achieve that by displaying the average cost incurred for the treatment specific to every condition by a doctor. A typical patient record contains tons of healthcare data, but unstructured data and patient feedback don't usually become a part of the clinical records. Yet, the input has critical insights into the patient experience that helps in decision-making and streamlining the patient experience.

As the digitization of healthcare grows significantly, advanced technologies like NLP are helping the industry extract valuable insights from the massive amounts of unstructured clinical data to uncover patterns and develop appropriate responses. 

The most compelling use case of NLP we employed is predictive and root cause analysis using the data deposits. It is possible to detect patterns and subsets of groups likely to have a propensity to specific health conditions. When a delayed diagnosis of illnesses can have devastating complications, NLP can help in early diagnosis.
